Messages caching (invalidated when thinking changes)
Max tokens and context window size with extended thinking
In older Claude models (prior to Claude Sonnet 3.7), if the sum of prompt tokens and max_tokens exceeded the model's context window, the system would automatically adjust max_tokens to fit within the context limit. This meant you could set a large max_tokens value and the system would silently reduce it as needed.

With Claude 3.7 and 4 models, max_tokens (which includes your thinking budget when thinking is enabled) is enforced as a strict limit. The system will now return a validation error if prompt tokens + max_tokens exceeds the context window size.

You can read through the guide on context windows for a more thorough deep dive.
The context window with extended thinking
When calculating context window usage with thinking enabled, there are some considerations to be aware of:

Thinking blocks from previous turns are stripped and not counted towards your context window
Current turn thinking counts towards your max_tokens limit for that turn
The diagram below demonstrates the specialized token management when extended thinking is enabled:

Context window diagram with extended thinking

The effective context window is calculated as:

context window =
  (current input tokens - previous thinking tokens) +
  (thinking tokens + encrypted thinking tokens + text output tokens)
Use the token counting API to get accurate token counts for your specific use case, especially when working with multi-turn conversations that include thinking.

The context window with extended thinking and tool use
When using extended thinking with tool use, thinking blocks must be explicitly preserved and returned with the tool results.

The effective context window calculation for extended thinking with tool use becomes:

context window =
  (current input tokens + previous thinking tokens + tool use tokens) +
  (thinking tokens + encrypted thinking tokens + text output tokens)
The diagram below illustrates token management for extended thinking with tool use:

Context window diagram with extended thinking and tool use

Managing tokens with extended thinking
Given the context window and max_tokens behavior with extended thinking Claude 3.7 and 4 models, you may need to:

More actively monitor and manage your token usage
Adjust max_tokens values as your prompt length changes
Potentially use the token counting endpoints more frequently
Be aware that previous thinking blocks don't accumulate in your context window
This change has been made to provide more predictable and transparent behavior, especially as maximum token limits have increased significantly.

Thinking encryption
Full thinking content is encrypted and returned in the signature field. This field is used to verify that thinking blocks were generated by Claude when passed back to the API.

It is only strictly necessary to send back thinking blocks when using tools with extended thinking. Otherwise you can omit thinking blocks from previous turns, or let the API strip them for you if you pass them back.

If sending back thinking blocks, we recommend passing everything back as you received it for consistency and to avoid potential issues.
Here are some important considerations on thinking encryption:

When streaming responses, the signature is added via a signature_delta inside a content_block_delta event just before the content_block_stop event.
signature values are significantly longer in Claude 4 models than in previous models.
The signature field is an opaque field and should not be interpreted or parsed.
signature values are compatible across platforms (Claude APIs, Amazon Bedrock, and Vertex AI). Values generated on one platform will be compatible with another.
Redacted thinking blocks
In addition to regular thinking blocks, the API may return redacted_thinking blocks. A redacted_thinking block contains encrypted thinking content in a data field, with no readable summary:

{
  "type": "redacted_thinking",
  "data": "..."
}
The data field is opaque and encrypted. Like the signature field on regular thinking blocks, you should pass redacted_thinking blocks back to the API unchanged when continuing a multi-turn conversation with tools.

If your code filters content blocks by type (for example, block.type == "thinking") when round-tripping responses with tool use, also include redacted_thinking blocks. Filtering on block.type == "thinking" alone silently drops redacted_thinking blocks and breaks the multi-turn protocol described above.
redacted_thinking blocks are a distinct content block type returned by the API when portions of thinking are safety-redacted. This is separate from the display: "omitted" option, which returns regular thinking blocks with an empty thinking field.
Differences in thinking across model versions
The Messages API handles thinking differently across Claude Sonnet 3.7 and Claude 4 models, primarily in summarization behavior.

See the table below for a condensed comparison:

Feature	Claude Sonnet 3.7	Claude 4 Models (pre-Opus 4.5)	Claude Opus 4.5	Claude Sonnet 4.6	Claude Opus 4.6 (adaptive thinking)	Claude Mythos Preview (adaptive thinking)
Thinking Output	Returns full thinking output	Returns summarized thinking	Returns summarized thinking	Returns summarized thinking	Returns summarized thinking	Omitted by default; set display: "summarized" to receive summarized thinking. Raw thinking tokens are never returned.
Interleaved Thinking	Not supported	Supported with interleaved-thinking-2025-05-14 beta header	Supported with interleaved-thinking-2025-05-14 beta header	Supported with interleaved-thinking-2025-05-14 beta header or automatic with adaptive thinking	Automatic with adaptive thinking (beta header not supported)	Automatic with adaptive thinking (beta header not supported). Inter-tool reasoning moves into thinking blocks on this model.
Thinking Block Preservation	Not preserved across turns	Not preserved across turns	Preserved by default	Preserved by default	Preserved by default	Preserved by default. Blocks are stripped when continuing the conversation on a model that does not support the Mythos thinking format.
Thinking block preservation in Claude Opus 4.5 and later
Starting with Claude Opus 4.5 (and continuing in Claude Opus 4.6), thinking blocks from previous assistant turns are preserved in model context by default. This differs from earlier models, which remove thinking blocks from prior turns.

Benefits of thinking block preservation:

Cache optimization: When using tool use, preserved thinking blocks enable cache hits as they are passed back with tool results and cached incrementally across the assistant turn, resulting in token savings in multi-step workflows
No intelligence impact: Preserving thinking blocks has no negative effect on model performance
Important considerations:

Context usage: Long conversations will consume more context space since thinking blocks are retained in context
Automatic behavior: This is the default behavior for Claude Opus 4.5 and later models (including Claude Mythos Preview and Claude Opus 4.6). No code changes or beta headers required
Backward compatibility: To leverage this feature, continue passing complete, unmodified thinking blocks back to the API as you would for tool use
For earlier models (Claude Sonnet 4.5, Opus 4.1, etc.), thinking blocks from previous turns continue to be removed from context. The existing behavior described in the Extended thinking with prompt caching section applies to those models.
Pricing
For complete pricing information including base rates, cache writes, cache hits, and output tokens, see the pricing page.

The thinking process incurs charges for:

Tokens used during thinking (output tokens)
Thinking blocks from the last assistant turn included in subsequent requests (input tokens)
Standard text output tokens
When extended thinking is enabled, a specialized system prompt is automatically included to support this feature.
When using summarized thinking:

